So how many control
variables should you use?
Well, there's no hard rule.
It could be as few as one, or
as many as five and sometimes more.
Having too many control
variables is usually worse for
an experiment than having too few.
We'll go into the reasons why when
we talk about how treatments and
control units are selected
in later lessons.
When choosing control variables,
you should also think about
the possibility of something
being a lurking variable.
Also called a confounding variable.
A lurking variable is when
a variable is highly correlated with
both target variable and
another control variable.
This can cause you to overweight
a control variable or
include the control variable
that really isn't important.
For example, you may look at some data
and decide that the consumption of ice
cream is related to the number
of deaths due to drowning.
Therefore, you may want to use
the consumption of ice cream
as a control variable.
In reality,
both the consumption of ice cream and
the number of deaths due to drowning
are related to temperature.
Temperature is the lurking
variable in this example.
When controlling for the temperature,
you can observe that there's no
relationship between the consumption
of ice cream and death from drowning.
In general, lurking variables can
be avoided by using sound logic and
taking the time to think through
your controlling variables